# MovementOutcome

## How to setup on a Windows machine

### GPU activation

We strongly advise the use of workstation with NVIDIA GPU to speed up training of models. To enable use of GPU, follow these instructions (**NB: Please ignore this step if similar GPU activation has been performed while setting up Markerless framework**):
1. Download [Visual Studio 2017 Free Community Edition](https://www.techspot.com/downloads/downloadnow/6278/?evp=ec1cdb914a1b435daaf013a4a084b093&file=7630) and install the program by following the necessary steps.
2. Download [CUDA Toolkit 11.1 Update 1](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-11.1.1-download-archive?target_os=Windows&target_arch=x86_64&target_version=10&target_type=exelocal) and follow instructions to perform installation.
3. Copy the file *'ptxas.exe'* in the folder *'C:\Program Files\NVIDIA GPU Computing Toolkit\CUDA\v11.1\bin\'* to *'Desktop'*.
4. Download [CUDA Toolkit 11.0 Update 1](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-11.0-update1-download-archive?target_os=Windows&target_arch=x86_64&target_version=10&target_type=exelocal) and follow instructions to perform installation.
5. Copy the file *'ptxas.exe'* from *'Desktop'* to the folder *'C:\Program Files\NVIDIA GPU Computing Toolkit\CUDA\v11.0\bin\'*.
6. Create a user at [NVIDIA.com](https://developer.nvidia.com/login) and download [CUDNN 8.0.4](https://developer.nvidia.com/compute/machine-learning/cudnn/secure/8.0.4/11.0_20200923/cudnn-11.0-windows-x64-v8.0.4.30.zip).
7. Open *'cudnn-11.0-windows-x64-v8.0.4.30.zip'* in *'Downloads'* and move the files in the folders *'bin'*, *'include'*, and *'lib'* under *'cuda'* to associated folders (*'bin'*, *'include'*, and *'lib'*) in *'C:\Program Files\NVIDIA GPU Computing Toolkit\CUDA\v11.0\'*.
8. Restart the computer.

### Setup MovementOutcome framework

To setup the MovementOutcome framework, follow these instructions:
1. Download [Anaconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/windows/) and perform the installation (if you have not previously downloaded and installed Anaconda).
2. Open a command prompt and clone the MovementOutcome framework: **git clone https://github.com/DeepInMotion/MovementOutcome.git**
3. Navigate to the MovementOutcome folder: **cd MovementOutcome**
4. Create the virtual environment movementoutcome: **conda env create -f environment.yml**

## How to use on a Windows machine

### Neural architecture search, cross-validation, and evaluation

This is a step by step procedure for how to use the MovementOutcome framework to search for, cross-validate, and evaluate graph convolutional networks (GCNs) suitable for a particular dataset of movements of individuals related to a specific movement outcome: 
1. Open a command prompt and activate the virtual environment: **activate movementoutcome**
2. Navigate to the MovementOutcome folder: **cd MovementOutcome**
3. Open the code library in a web browser: **jupyter lab**
4. Create a new project folder under *'projects'* with a specified name (e.g., *'im2021'*).
5. Create a subfolder within your project folder with name *'searches'* (e.g., *'im2021/searches'*). Your results from neural architecture search (NAS), cross-validation, and evaluation will be stored in this folder.
6. Create a subfolder within your project folder with name *'data'* (e.g., *'im2021/data'*).
7. Upload coordinate files and outcomes
- Alternative a) If you have raw coordinate CSVs (e.g., generated by the Markerless framework) not sorted into cross-validation folds and test set: Create a subfolder *'raw'* within *'data'*, and upload your raw coordinate files (i.e., with prefix *'orgcoords_'*) into a folder named *'coords'* (e.g., *'im2021/data/raw/coords'*) and outcome file (i.e., *'outcomes.csv'*) into *'outcomes'* folder (e.g., *'im2021/data/raw/outcomes'*). The procedure will randomize the coordinate files into folders for cross-validation folds (e.g., *'val1'*) and test set (i.e., *'test'*) and preprocess the coordinate files to generate Numpy array files for datasets that are stored in the *'processed'* subfolder (e.g., *'im2021/data/processed/test_coords.npy'*).
- Alternative b) If you have previously determined the dataset split and generated separate Numpy array files for coordinate files (e.g., *'test_coords.npy'*), individual IDs (e.g., *'test_ids.npy'*), and outcomes (e.g., *'test_labels.npy'*) of each dataset: Create a subfolder *'processed'* within the *'data'* folder (e.g., *'im2021/data/processed*) and directly upload the three Numpy array files of each dataset into this folder. 
8. Set choices for NAS, cross-validation and/or evaluation in *'main.py'*:
- Line 10: Set name of your project folder.
- Line 22: Set name of the search. Hyperparameters of the search and all data related to individual search experiments will be stored inside a folder with the given search name within the *'searches'* subfolder.
- Line 25: Set `search = True` if you want to run NAS to find a suitable GCN, otherwise set `search = False` if you have previously run NAS. 
- Line 26: Set `crossval = True` if you want to cross-validate the GCN with highest performance (i.e., Area Under ROC Curve) on the NAS, otherwise use `crossval = False` to skip cross-validation. 
- Line 27: Set `evaluate = True` if you want to evaluate on the test set the GCN instances obtained from cross-validation, otherwise use `evaluate = False`. The evaluation will use the GCN instances as an ensemble where the final classification is based on the aggregated prediction across the instances.
- Line 30-31: Define computational device responsible for the analysis (i.e., `output_device`) and number of workers responsible for data handling. 
- Line 34: Set reference to model script for defining GCN (e.g., `model_script = 'models.gcn_search_model'` for script *'gcn_search_model.py'* in *'models'*).
- Line 35: Set number of dimensions in coordinate files (e.g., `input_dimensions = 2` for 2D coordinates).
- Line 36: Set number of body parts in coordinate files (e.g., `input_spatial_resolution = 19`).
- Line 37: Set number of time steps in a movement window (e.g., `input_temporal_resolution = 150`).
- Line 38-40: Set additional fixed hyperparameters of a GCN.
- Line 43-48: Define the human skeleton (e.g., body parts, neighboring body parts, and center of skeleton).
- Line 52-57: Set biomechanical properties to use as input for GCN.
- Line 60-61: Set temporal resolution of coordinate files (e.g., `frames_per_second = 30.0`) and stride of median filter used for temporal smoothing of coordinates (e.g., `filter_stride = 2`).
- Line 64-65: Set batch size for training and validation (e.g., `trainval_batch_size = 32`) and number of epochs taken into account for computing smoothed validation loss (e.g., `loss_filter_size = 5`).
- Line 68: Set number of positive samples required per negative sample (i.e., `train_num_positive_samples_per_negative_sample`) to compensate for unbalanced datasets. Should ideally be set to number of individuals with negative outcome divided by number of individuals with positive outcome.
- Line 73-90: Adjust hyperparameters of the optimizer and data augmentation if desired. However, we suggest using the default values as a starting point as they have worked well across a wide variety of GCNs.
- Line 93-100: Set preferences for the evaluation process, including portion of individuals in the test set (i.e., `test_size`), distance between subsequent movement windows (e.g., `parts_distance = 75` for 50% overlapping windows with `input_temporal_resolution = 150`), scheme for aggregating predictions across movement windows, and prediction threshold for classifying an individual as positive outcome (e.g., `prediction_threshold = 0.5`).  
- Line 103-136: Specify the details of the NAS, including hyperparameters of the K-Best Search strategy (e.g., `k` and `performance_threshold`), choices and associated alternatives in the search space (i.e., `search_space`), training and validation sets of the search (i.e., `search_train_dataset` and `search_val_dataset`), number of epochs (`search_num_epochs`), and performance requirements per epoch (i.e., `search_critical_epochs` and `search_critical_epoch_values`).
- Line 139-146: Specify the details for cross-validation, including number of validation folds (i.e., `crossval_folds`) and number of epochs for each cross-validation run (i.e., `crossval_num_epochs`).    
9. Save *'main.py'* (with the chosen hyperparameter setting).
10. Open a new terminal window from the jupyter lab tab in the web browser.
11. Run NAS, cross-validation and/or evaluation in the terminal window: **python main.py**
12. The results of the NAS, cross-validation, and evaluation processes are stored in the folder of the current search within the *'searches'* folder (e.g., *'im2021/searches/21092022 1522 IM2021'*).

### Skeleton-based prediction of movement outcome

To employ a cross-validated GCN obtained by NAS for prediction of movement outcome from raw coordinate files we suggest the following steps:
1. Set search details in prediction script (i.e., *'predict/prediction.py'*):
- Line 111: Set name of your project folder (e.g., *'im2021'*).
- Line 121: Set name of the search used to obtain the GCN (e.g., *'21092022 1522 IM2021'*).
- Line 124: Set `save = True` if you want to save predicted risk of outcome, classification and associated certainty in CSV file, otherwise set `save = False`.
- Line 125: Set `visualize = True` if you want to store class activation map visualization of body parts with highest contribution towards predicted risk of outcome, otherwise set `visualize = False`.
- Line 128: Define computational device responsible for the analysis (i.e., `output_device`) and number of workers responsible for data handling. 
- Line 132: Set reference to model script for defining GCN (e.g., `model_script = 'models.gcn_search_model'` for script *'gcn_search_model.py'* in *'models'*).
- Line 133: Set number of dimensions in coordinate files (e.g., `input_dimensions = 2` for 2D coordinates).
- Line 134: Set number of body parts in coordinate files (e.g., `input_spatial_resolution = 19`).
- Line 135: Set number of time steps in a movement window (e.g., `input_temporal_resolution = 150`).
- Line 136-138: Set additional fixed hyperparameters of a GCN.
- Line 141-146: Define the human skeleton (e.g., body parts, neighboring body parts, and center of skeleton).
- Line 148: Set sample coordinates of human skeleton (i.e., `sample_coords`).
- Line 151-156: Set biomechanical properties to use as input for GCN.
- Line 159-160: Set temporal resolution of coordinate files (e.g., `frames_per_second = 30.0`) and stride of median filter used for temporal smoothing of coordinates (e.g., `filter_stride = 2`).
- Line 163-168: Set hyperparameters for the evaluation process, including batch size (i.e., `evaluation_batch_size`), distance between subsequent movement windows (e.g., `parts_distance = 75` for 50% overlapping windows with `input_temporal_resolution = 150`), scheme for aggregating predictions across movement windows, and prediction threshold for classifying an individual as positive outcome (e.g., `prediction_threshold = 0.5`).
- Line 171: Set the number of cross-validation folds (i.e., `crossval_folds`).
2. Create a folder with coordinate files that should be analyzed by the prediction model (e.g., *'coords'*).
4. Run the prediction script on the coordinate files in the created folder. E.g.: **python predict/prediction.py coords**
5. The results of the prediction model are stored in a folder with the same name as the folder of the coordinate files in the specific search folder within *'searches'* (e.g., *'im2021/searches/21092022 1522 IM2021/coords'*).
- Predicted risk of outcome, classification, and associated classification certainty of each individual are stored in CSV file (e.g., *'im2021/searches/21092022 1522 IM2021/coords/individual1_results.png'*).
- Class activation map visualizations of body part contributions towards risk of movement outcome for the individual are stored as PNG file (e.g., *'im2021/searches/21092022 1522 IM2021/coords/individual1_cam.png'*).